Project Gutenberg's Miniature essays: Igor Stravinsky, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Miniature essays: Igor Stravinsky

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: August 27, 2012 [EBook #40597]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINIATURE ESSAYS: IGOR STRAVINSKY ***




Produced by Linda Cantoni, Eleni Christofaki, Bryan Ness
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  Transcriber's note

  Note de transcription

Minor punctuation inconsistencies have been silently corrected. A list
of other corrections made can be found at the end of the book.

Les incohérences de ponctuation mineures ont été corrigées. Une liste
d'autres corrections faites se trouve à la fin du livre.


  Mark-up: _italics_
           =bold=

  Marquage: _mots en italique_
            =mots en gras=




  MINIATURE ESSAYS::


  IGOR STRAVINSKY


  Price 6d. (fr. 0.75) Net.


  J. & W. CHESTER LTD.

  _London_:--11, Great Marlborough St., W.1 _Genève_:--9-11, Place de la
  Fusterie.


  _Seuls Dépositaires_

  _France_:                            _Belgique_:
  ROUART, LEROLLE & CIE,             MAISON CHESTER,
  29, Rue d'Astorg, PARIS.       86, Rue de la Montagne, BRUXELLES.

  _Holland_:                           _Italie_:
  BROEKMANS & VAN POPPEL,            PIZZI & CIE,
  92, Baerlestraat, AMSTERDAM.   Via Zamboni 1, BOLOGNA.


  _Copyright, 1921 by J. & W. Chester LTD._


  PRINTED IN ENGLAND.




[Illustration: Photographie, Robert Regassi, Lausanne

IGOR STRAVINSKY]




IGOR STRAVINSKY


Igor Stravinsky was born at Oranienbaum, near St. Petersburg, on June
5th (18th), 1882. His father, an operatic singer, who won great favour
with the public of the Russian capital at the Maryinsky Theatre, soon
discovered remarkable musical gifts in the boy, which he did not neglect
to develop, although he wished him to grow up to a legal career. In
accordance with this plan, Igor Stravinsky, on having reached
adolescence, entered the University of St. Petersburg and devoted
himself to the study of jurisprudence, not without periodical and almost
irresistible impulsions to abandon it for music. He had thus reached the
age of twenty-two, when a meeting with Rimsky-Korsakov, who saw and
appreciated the young man's astonishing talent, proved the decisive
event of his life. Rimsky-Korsakov declared himself willing to accept
him as a pupil.

The direct outcome of Rimsky-Korsakov's tuition was, first of all, a
Symphony, begun in 1905 and finished in 1907. This was succeeded by
"Faun and Shepherdess," a song-cycle with orchestra, and two orchestral
works, "Fireworks" and "Scherzo fantastique." The latter was the means
of bringing about a meeting that was destined to direct Stravinsky's
activities into a new channel: he made the acquaintance of Serge
Diaghilev, who was struck by the vitality and colour of the work he had
heard, and who induced him to set to music one of the ballets he
proposed to produce. This was the "Firebird" (1910), which was followed
in due course by "Petrushka" (1911) and "Le Sacre du Printemps" (1913).
Next came an opera, begun some years earlier, "The Nightingale,"
finished in 1914, the second and third acts of which were later
converted into the symphonic poem, "The Song of the Nightingale" (1917).
Stravinsky left Russia at an early stage of his career and has since
lived alternately in Paris and on the shores of the Lake of Geneva.

It is almost impossible to-day to consider the work of Igor Stravinsky
with the detachment that is the first requisite of a judicious
appreciation, and to avoid taking part in the violent controversy to
which it has given rise, a controversy that is in itself a testimony to
its vitality, for Stravinsky's music is so characteristic an expression
of the artistic tendencies of our time that even those who most dislike
it cannot pass it by in silence. It is perhaps hardly paradoxical to
assert that fundamentally all the critics agree as to its significance,
and that they differ merely in the point of view from which they regard
it.

There have been few composers whose development has been as rapid and as
far-reaching as that of Stravinsky, and this is probably the chief
reason why his later works so completely baffle anyone who is not
intimately acquainted with those that precede them. For it cannot be too
strongly emphasized that, disjointed as Stravinsky's output may appear
to the superficial observer, it reveals a gradual and very logical
transformation, in the course of which each work falls into its place
and contributes something to an evolution--so often mistaken for
revolution--which is only more difficult to follow than that of most
other composers because it is so much more rapid. Stravinsky has
covered, within a decade, a stretch of ground which most others would
have taken fifty years to traverse, if indeed they would have traversed
it at all. Small wonder that he leaves many of those who endeavour to
follow him in a state of breathless vexation by the wayside.

The development began immediately after the Symphony, Stravinsky's first
work, and the only example of his availing himself of a classical form
for the expression of his ideas, which were even then sufficiently
original to force upon him the realization of the necessity of creating
new and more elastic moulds. The next works, in fact, "Faun and
Shepherdess," "Fireworks" and "Scherzo fantastique," already give an
impression of far greater spontaneity and, despite the still apparent
outside influences, especially Rimsky-Korsakov's, of greater
individuality. Rimsky-Korsakov's sway over his pupil was, even at this
early stage, confined to a certain picturesqueness that soon became too
obvious for Stravinsky, and to the example of the master's glowing
orchestration, an inheritance destined to bear compound interest in the
pupil's hands. In the "Firebird" this influence is seen for the last
time and in a greatly diminished degree, being now restricted to the
characteristic national treatment of the thematic material. It may be
remarked in passing that the national element is a secondary matter in
Stravinsky's music, and that his personal expression always
predominates; he is above all a _musician_, and only incidentally a
_Russian_ musician, just as Poushkin was first and foremost a poet, who
only by the accident of his birth happened to express himself in the
Russian language. Yet the national idiom in Stravinsky is second only to
his universally human expression, or we should never have had such a
work as "Petrushka." In this ballet, still regarded as his masterpiece
by those who are unable to follow him beyond it, he certainly reached
full maturity and completely revealed his personality. To consider the
music of "Petrushka," as the casual listener might be tempted to do, as
merely descriptive, is to mistake its purpose entirely. With Stravinsky,
as we may already see in the "Firebird," where it is narrative rather
than illustrative, music is never subservient to anything else, even
when it is allied to literary, histrionic or choreographic conceptions.
It is a separate organism and always remains absolute music that makes
its appeal to the senses rather than to the intellect. It is not
explicative, but parallel, it is a stimulant that calls forth other
ideas; hence the possibility of giving "Le Sacre du Printemps" two
entirely different choreographic settings. The tendency to provide pure
music to a scenario with which it is analogous in feeling, but from
which it remains nevertheless independent, reaches its culmination in
"L'Histoire du Soldat" and in "Renard." That the music of the former,
for instance, is capable of being enjoyed separately, as music pure and
simple, has been proved by more than one concert performance, and will
be experienced by those who play at home the composer's own Trio
arrangement (for piano, violin and clarinet), or the piano transcription
of some of the principal numbers.

A very remarkable feature of "L'Histoire du Soldat" is the manner in
which Stravinsky explores the possibilities of various forms of popular
music--not the folk-song, but the music of the fair, the ballroom, or
the music-hall--which he converts into art-forms that are lifted out of
their original functions. The Waltz, the Tango, the Rag, become in his
hands much the same musical assets that the Allemande, the Courante, the
Sarabande, became in the hands of the old masters. Other examples of
this conversion of vulgar forms of music may be found in the "Piano Rag
Music," in the "Ragtime" for small orchestra or piano, in the two sets
of easy pieces for piano duet, and in the diminutive piano pieces for
children, "Les Cinq Doigts."

It is difficult to imagine that the principle of absolute music can be
realized where it is a question of the setting of words; yet Stravinsky
has succeeded in upholding his ideal even in such works as the
"Berceuses du Chat," the "Pribaoutki," the "Four Chants Russes" and the
"Three Histoires pour Enfants." This explains at once the otherwise
perhaps inexplicable choice of words that have no literary significance.
To set a great poet's words to music has become for Stravinsky an
absurdity, because to him the verses themselves are already a completely
and independently satisfying equivalent of musical emotion. His aim is
not to write music that performs the functions of applied art, and he is
therefore on the look-out for texts that are too insignificant or naïve
in themselves, such as the little popular Russian verses he has chosen.
They made their appeal to him because of their sonorous and rhythmic,
not because of any literary quality; they are potential, foreseeing all
sorts of possibilities which they leave to the composer to realize.
Stravinsky is sociable and direct; he writes simply for the enjoyment of
player and hearer alike.

The one quality of Stravinsky's art that no critic has ventured to
dispute is his consummate mastery of every instrumental resource. His
combinations of tone-colour always hold surprises in store for us, which
curiously enough do not seem to wear off even after repeated hearing.
One of the secrets of the extraordinary resonance that astonishes the
hearer is the fact that Stravinsky writes for each instrument
individually as if he were himself a virtuoso on it; he always gives it
exactly the kind of music to play that suits its particular character.
He does not transfer the same phrase from one instrument to another
unless he is sure that it is congenial to both, and he generally prefers
to give each one something entirely different to do, something that
invariably goes to the very root of its idiosyncrasy. This tendency
results in a subtle blending of different rays of colour and degrees of
light and shade, in a kind of dynamic (as distinct from harmonic) chord
formation. In the later works, this manner of individualizing each
instrument has become still more interesting because Stravinsky has more
closely adapted his medium to his purpose. He distributes his chords
among instruments of very different character instead of aiming at unity
of colour, and he thus helps us to hear each of the simultaneously
sounding notes as a separate value. "L'Histoire du Soldat" and the
"Ragtime" give an impression of extraordinary plasticity; we have here a
parallel to the three-dimensional art of the sculptor rather than to the
deceptive perspective of the painter's canvas. But Stravinsky can at
will abandon the three dimensions and give us a perfectly satisfying
study in mere contour, such as we get in the three pieces for solo
clarinet.

An entirely new conception is the ballet-divertissement, "Les Noces,"
where in addition to an orchestra from which string instruments are
excluded, there are four solo voices and a chorus supporting the whole
fabric of sound, sometimes alternately and sometimes in combination,
without a single interruption throughout the whole work. The music of
the _Noces_, like all the later works by Stravinsky, is directly and
exclusively written to satisfy the auditive faculty of the hearer and it
is thus a new affirmation of the reaction against the subjective
expression in music that has so many adepts among the greatest
composers of the nineteenth and the opening of the present century. If
he can be compared to any older masters, he certainly has far more
affinity with Haydn and Mozart than with any nineteenth century
composer, and it is less surprising than those who are but superficially
acquainted with his work might be inclined to think, that he should have
found a very congenial task in composing on the basis of some pieces by
Pergolesi the ballet of "Pulcinella," a task of which he acquitted
himself with a delicacy and a reverence that none but a kindred spirit
could have achieved.

[Decoration]




Igor Strawinsky est né à Oranienbaum, près de St. Petersbourg, 5 (18)
Juin, 1882. Son père, un chanteur d'opéra qui jouissait d'une grande
faveur auprès du public de la capitale assidu au Théâtre Marie,
découvrit bientôt les remarquables dons musicaux de l'enfant et ne
négligea point de les développer, bien qu'il souhaitât le voir
poursuivre l'étude du droit. Conformément à cette intention, Igor
Strawinsky entra par la suite à l'Université de St. Petersbourg et se
consacra à l'étude de la jurisprudence, non sans de vives et presque
irrésistibles tentations de l'abandonner pour la musique. Il avait ainsi
atteint l'âge de vingt-deux ans quand une rencontre avec
Rimsky-Korsakow, qui vit et apprécia l'étonnant talent du jeune homme,
fut l'événement qui décida de sa vie. Il se déclara prêt à le prendre
pour élève.

La conséquence directe de l'enseignement de Rimsky fut, tout d'abord,
une _Symphonie_ commencée en 1905 et achevée en 1907; et qui fut suivie
par _Faune et Bergère_, suite de mélodies avec orchestre, et par deux
oeuvres pour orchestre _Feu d'artifice_ et _Scherzo fantastique_. Cette
dernière oeuvre fut l'occasion d'une rencontre qui allait engager
l'activité de Strawinsky dans une nouvelle voie; il fit alors la
rencontre de Serge de Diaghileff qui fut frappé de la couleur et de la
vie de l'oeuvre qu'il venait d'entendre et qui décida le compositeur à
mettre en musique un des ballets qu'il se proposait de monter. Ce fut
_l'Oiseau de feu_ (1910), suivi peu après par _Petrouchka_ (1911) et _le
Sacre du Printemps_ (1913). Puis vint un opéra, commencé plusieurs
années auparavant, _le Rossignol_, achevé en 1914 et dont le deuxième et
troisième acte furent ensuite convertis en poème symphonique: _le Chant
du Rossignol_ (1917). Strawinsky avait quitté la Russie au début de sa
carrière et a vécu depuis lors alternativement à Paris et sur les bords
du lac de Genève.

Il est presque impossible aujourd'hui de considérer l'oeuvre d'Igor
Strawinsky avec le détachement qui est la condition d'une appréciation
judicieuse, et d'éviter de prendre part dans la violente controverse à
laquelle elle a donné naissance, controverse qui est par elle-même le
témoignage de la vitalité de cette oeuvre: car la musique de Strawinsky
est une expression si caractéristique des tendances artistiques de notre
temps que même ceux qui la détestent le plus ne peuvent la passer sous
silence. Il est peut-être à peine paradoxal d'affirmer que tous les
critiques sont essentiellement d'accord sur sa signification et qu'ils
ne diffèrent que par le point de vue d'où ils la considèrent.

Peu de compositeurs ont connu un développement aussi rapide et aussi
considérable que Strawinsky, et c'est probablement pourquoi ses
dernières oeuvres déconcertent si complètement ceux qui ne sont pas
familiarisés avec des oeuvres précédentes. On ne peut en effet trop
insister sur le fait que si décousue que puisse paraître l'oeuvre de
Strawinsky aux yeux d'un observateur superficiel, il révèle une
évolution graduelle et parfaitement logique au cours de laquelle chaque
oeuvre prend sa place et contribue à dessiner la courbe d'une évolution,
(trop souvent considérée comme révolution) qu'il est seulement plus
difficile de suivre que celle des autres compositeurs parce qu'elle est
plus rapide. Strawinsky a parcouru en dix ans un chemin que la plupart
des autres auraient mis cinquante ans à franchir, si même ils l'avaient
franchi. Comment s'étonner alors qu'il laisse haletants sur le bord de
la route bon nombre de ceux qui s'efforcent de le suivre?

Ce développement commence aussitôt après la _Symphonie_, première oeuvre
de Strawinsky, et seul exemple d'utilisation d'une forme classique qu'il
ait donné pour exprimer ses idées, idées qui étaient dès alors assez
originales pour l'amener à se créer des moules nouveaux et plus souples.
Les oeuvres suivantes; _Faune et Bergère_, _Feu d'artifice_ et le
_Scherzo fantastique_, donnent déjà la sensation d'une spontanéité
beaucoup plus vive, et en dépit de visibles influences (spécialement
celle de Rimsky) d'une plus grande individualité. L'empreinte de Rimsky
sur son élève était, même à cette époque des débuts, limitée à un
certain pittoresque qui devint bientôt trop _facile_ pour Strawinsky et
à l'exemple de la brillante orchestration du maître, héritage qui devait
porter des intérêts composés entre les mains de l'élève. Cette
influence se montre pour la dernière fois et grandement atténuée dans
l'_Oiseau de Feu_ et se réduit à l'emploi caractéristiquement national
du matériel thématique. On peut remarquer en passant que l'élément
national est une question secondaire dans la musique de Strawinsky, et
que l'expression personnelle prédomine toujours; il est par dessus tout
un _musicien_, et seulement occasionnellement un musicien _russe_,
exactement comme Pouchkine était, d'abord et avant tout, un poète qui
dut au seul hasard de la naissance de s'exprimer en russe. Mais chez
Strawinsky l'idiome national ne passe qu'immédiatement après
l'expression universellement humaine, sans quoi nous n'aurions jamais eu
_Petrouchka_. Dans ce ballet, que considèrent encore comme son chef
d'oeuvre ceux qui ne peuvent le suivre plus loin, il a certainement
atteint sa pleine maturité et révèle complètement sa personnalité.
Considérer la musique de _Petrouchka_ comme uniquement descriptive,
ainsi que l'auditeur occasionel peut être tenté de le faire, c'est
s'abuser entièrement. Chez Strawinsky, ainsi qu'on l'a déjà vu dans
l'_Oiseau de Feu_, où elle est plutôt un récit qu'une illustration, la
musique n'est jamais subordonnée à quoique ce soit d'autre, même
lorsqu'elle se trouve alliée à des conceptions littéraires, théâtrales
ou chorégraphiques. C'est un organisme séparé et qui demeure toujours de
la musique absolu s'adressant aux sens bien plus qu'à l'intellect. Elle
n'est pas explicative, mais parallèle, c'est un stimulant qui éveille
d'autres idées; de là la possibilité de donner du _Sacre du Printemps_
deux expressions chorégraphiques entièrement différentes. La tendance à
attacher, à un scenario, de la musique pure qui, si analogue qu'elle
puisse être par le sentiment, en demeure cependant indépendante, se
montre au plus haut point dans l'_Histoire du Soldat_ et dans _Renard_.
Que la musique de la première, par exemple, puisse être goûtée
séparément, comme de la musique pure et simple, on en a eu la preuve par
plus d'une exécution au concert, et on peut l'avoir aussi en jouant chez
soi l'arrangement en Trio (piano, violon et clarinette) ou la suite pour
piano que l'auteur a faite de quelques uns des principaux morceaux.

Un caractère très remarquable de l'_Histoire du Soldat_ est la manière
dont Strawinsky utilise les ressources des diverses formes de la musique
populaire,--non pas la chanson populaire, mais la musique des foires,
des salles de bal, ou du "music-hall,"--qu'il convertit en formes d'art
éloignées de leur fonction originelle. La _Valse_, le _Tango_, le _Rag_
deviennent entre ses mains des éléments musicaux analogues à ce que
l'_Allemande_, la _Courante_ ou la _Sarabande_ sont devenues entre les
mains des Maîtres anciens. D'autres exemples de cette transformation des
formes vulgaires de la musique se voient dans le _Piano-Rag-music_, dans
le _Ragtime_ pour petit orchestre et piano, dans les deux séries de
pièces faciles à quatre mains, et dans les toutes petites pièces de
piano pour enfants, _les Cinq Doigts_.

Il est difficile d'imaginer que le principe de la musique absolue puisse
être réalisé lorsqu'il est question de paroles mises en musique;
pourtant Strawinsky a réussi à rester fidèle à son idéal, même dans des
oeuvres telles que _Berceuses du chat_, les _Pribaoutki_, les _Quatre
Chants russes_ et les _Trois Histoires pour enfants_. Cela explique de
suite le choix, peut-être inexplicable autrement, de paroles qui n'ont
aucune signification littéraire. Mettre en musique les paroles d'un
grand poète est devenue pour Strawinsky une absurdité, parce qu'à son
avis les vers eux-mêmes sont déjà un équivalent satisfaisant,
complètement et en soi, de l'émotion musicale. Son but n'est pas
d'écrire de la musique qui remplisse le rôle de l'art appliqué, aussi
est-il toujours en quête de textes tout a fait insignifiants ou naïfs
par eux-mêmes, tels que les petits vers populaires russes qu'il a
choisis. Ils le satisfont par leur qualité sonore et rythmique et non
pas par leur qualité littéraire: ils contiennent en eux toutes sortes de
ressources qu'il appartient au compositeur de faire surgir. Strawinsky
est sociable et direct; il écrit simplement pour la satisfaction de
l'exécutant et de l'auditeur à la fois.

Une qualité de l'art de Strawinsky qu'aucun critique ne s'est aventuré à
discuter est sa maîtrise consommée de toutes les ressources
instrumentales. Ses combinaisons de timbres ont toujours pour nous des
surprises en réserve, qui assez étrangement, ne semblent pas s'user
après des auditions répétées. L'un des secrets de l'extraordinaire
résonnance qui étonne l'auditeur est le fait que Strawinsky écrit pour
chaque instrument individuellement comme s'il était lui-même un
virtuose; il lui donne toujours à jouer exactement la sorte de musique
qui convient à son caractère particulier. Il ne transporte pas la même
phrase d'un instrument à l'autre, à moins d'être sûr qu'elle peut
convenir aux deux, et il préfère généralement donner à chacun d'eux
quelque chose d'entièrement différent, quelque chose qui aille
invariablement jusqu'aux profondeurs mêmes de son caractère particulier.
Il en résulte un mélange subtil de rayons de couleurs différentes et de
nuances de lumière et d'ombre, une sorte de formation dynamique des
accords (distincte de la formation harmonique). Dans ses dernières
oeuvres, cette façon d'individualiser chaque instrument est devenue
encore plus intéressante parce que Strawinsky a étroitement adapté le
moyen au but. Il distribue ses accords parmi des instruments de
caractère différent au lieu d'avoir en vue l'unité de couleur, et il
nous laisse ainsi entendre chacune des notes résonnantes comme une
valeur séparée. _L'Histoire du Soldat_ et le _Ragtime_ donnent une
impression d'extraordinaire plasticité: on a ici un parallèle à l'art à
trois dimensions du sculpteur, plutôt qu'à l'illusoire perspective de la
toile du peintre. Mais Strawinsky peut aussi abandonner les trois
dimensions et nous donner une étude de simple contour, parfaitement
satisfaisante, telle qu'on la trouve dans les _Trois pièces pour
clarinette seule_.

Une conception tout-à-fait neuve est le ballet-divertissement: _Les
Noces_ où en plus d'un orchestre d'où la masse habituelle des cordes est
exclue, l'on trouve quatre voix et un choeur qui supportent toute la
sonorité, quelquefois alternativement, quelquefois combinés avec elle,
sans une simple interruption durant tout le cours de l'oeuvre. La
musique des _Noces_, comme du reste toutes les dernières oeuvres de
Strawinsky, s'adressant directement et uniquement à l'ouïe de
l'auditeur, est une nouvelle affirmation de cette réaction contre
l'expression subjective en musique dont on trouve tant d'adeptes parmi
les plus grands musiciens du 19e et du commencement de notre siècle.
S'il fallait le comparer à quelque maître d'autrefois, on lui trouverait
assurément plus d'affinité avec Haydn et Mozart qu'avec ceux-là, et il
est moins surprenant que ceux qui ne connaissent que superficiellement
son oeuvre pourraient le croire, de voir qu'il a trouvé une tâche qui
lui convenait parfaitement lorsqu'il a composé sur des morceaux de
musique de Pergolèse le ballet _Pulcinella_, tâche dont il s'est
acquitté avec une délicatesse et un respect que seul pouvait posséder un
esprit de la même famille.

[Décoration]




[Illustration: IGOR STRAVINSKY

chansons plaisantes

pour une voix et huit instruments

j. & W. Chester Ltd Londres & Genève]




[Music: [Russian: Zhar' Ptitza]--L'oiseau de feu]




[Music: D'après le manuscrit original, propriété du Conservatoire de
Musique de Genève.]




    WORKS BY   OEUVRES PAR

    =IGOR STRAVINSKY=


  =PIANO=

                                                                 _s. d._

  =Les Cinq Doigts=, 8 Pièces très faciles sur 5 notes           3    0

  =Piano Rag-Music=                                              3    0

  =Ragtime=                                                      4    0

  =Grande Suite de "L'Histoire du Soldat"=                      15    0


  =PIANO SCORES--PARTITIONS POUR PIANO=

  =Pulcinella=, Ballet d'après la musique de Pergolesi          15    0


  =PIANO (Four Hands--Quatre Mains)=

  =Trois Pièces Faciles=, Marche--Valse--Polka                   2    6

  =Cinq Pièces Faciles=,
  Andante--Española--Balalaika--Napolitana--Galop                3    6


  =CLARINET SOLO--CLARINETTE SEULE=

  =Trois Pièces pour Clarinette seule=                           3    0


  =CHAMBER MUSIC--MUSIQUE DE CHAMBRE=

  =Berceuses du Chat=, pour Contralto et 3 Clarinettes

    Score--Partition 6/- Parts--Parties                          6    0

  =Pribaoutki= (=Chansons plaisantes=), pour une Voix, Flûte, Hautbois,
  Clarinette, Basson, 2 Violons, Alto et Violoncelle

    Score--Partition 8/- Parts--Parties                          10   0

  =Suite de "L'Histoire du Soldat"=, pour Clarinette, Violon et Piano
                                                                 20   0


  _All Prices net cash_

    _Les Prix pour la France, la Belgique et la Suisse sont à raison de
    fr. 1.50 par shilling_




    WORKS BY   OEUVRES PAR

    =IGOR STRAVINSKY=


  =ORCHESTRA--ORCHESTRE=

                                                                 _s. d._

  =Musique de "L'Histoire du Soldat"=, pièce lue, jouée et dansée, texte
  de C. F. Ramuz
                                                    On Hire--En location

  =Suite de "L'Histoire du Soldat"=, pour petit orchestre
                                                    On Hire--En location

  =L'Oiseau de Feu=, Suite, réorchestrée pour orchestre
  moyen--re-orchestrated for medium orchestra. Score--Partition  40   0

      Parts--Parties, 50/- Extra Parts--Supplémentaires          5    0

  =Marche--Valse--Polka--Galop=, tirées des recueils des pièces
  faciles à 4 mains, pour petit orchestre
                                                    On Hire--En location

  =Chant des Bateliers sur le Volga=, pour Instruments à vent

    Score and Parts--Partition et Parties                        5    0

  =Ragtime=, pour petit orchestre Score--Partition               7    0

     Parts on hire--Parties en location


  =SONGS--CHANT=

  =Berceuses du Chat=, Sur le Poële--Intérieur--Dodo--Ce qu'il a, le
  Chat                                                           3    0

  =4 Chants Russes=, Canard--Chanson pour compter--Le moineau est
  assis--Chant dissident                                         3    0

  =3 Histoires pour Enfants=, Tilimbom--Les canards, les cygnes les
  oies--Chanson de l'ours                                        2    6

  =Pribaoutki= (=Chansons plaisantes=), L'oncle Armand--Le Four--Le
  Colonel--Le Vieux et le Lièvre                                 4    0

  =Pastorale=, Chant sans paroles                                2    0


  =VOCAL SCORES--PARTITIONS CHANT ET PIANO=

  =Les Noces=, Divertissement--Soli, choeurs et orchestre. In the Press

  =Renard=, Conte burlesque                                      15   0

  =Pulcinella=, Ballet d'après la musique de Pergolesi           15   0


  _All Prices net cash_

    _Les prix pour la France, la Belgique et la Suisse sont à raison de
    fr. 1.50 par shilling_




MINIATURE ESSAYS


    Essays on the following Composers, published in English and French:

    Sont publiés, en français et en anglais, des essais sur les
    compositeurs suivants:

    GRANVILLE BANTOCK
    ARNOLD BAX
    LORD BERNERS
    ARTHUR BLISS
    ALFREDO CASELLA
    L'ECOLE DES "SIX"
    MANUEL DE FALLA
    EUGENE GOOSSENS
    GABRIEL GROVLEZ
    JOHN R. HEATH
    JOSEF HOLBROOKE
    GUSTAV HOLST
    D. E. INGHELBRECHT
    JOHN IRELAND
    JOSEPH JONGEN
    PAUL DE MALEINGREAU
    G. FRANCESCO MALIPIERO
    ERKKI MELARTIN
    SELIM PALMGREN
    ILDEBRANDO PIZZETTI
    POLDOWSKI
    JEAN SIBELIUS
    IGOR STRAVINSKY


    _Price 6d. (fr. 0.75) each_


    J. & W. CHESTER Ltd.

    11, Great Marlborough Street, London, W.1




Corrections


The first line indicates the original text, the second the corrected
text:

La première ligne indique le texte original, la deuxième le texte
corrigé:

  p. 7: satisfiying study in mere contour
        satisfying study in mere contour

  p. 9: la capitale assidu au Théatre Marie
        la capitale assidu au Théâtre Marie

        bien qu'il souhaitât le voir
        bien qu'il souhaitât le voir

  p. 10: assez originales pous l'amener
         assez originales pour l'amener

  p. 11: à des conceptions littéraires, théatrales
         à des conceptions littéraires, théâtrales

  p. 13: phrase d'un instrument a l'autre
         phrase d'un instrument à l'autre

         une sorte de formation dinamique
         une sorte de formation dynamique

         s'adressant directemant
         s'adressant directement

         en musique dout ou trouve
         en musique dont on trouve

         les plus grands musicians
         les plus grands musiciens

  p. 17: Conservatoire de Musique de Geneve.
         Conservatoire de Musique de Genève.


Erratum

    p. 6: "Four Chants Russes" and the "Three Histoires pour Enfants."
    should be "Quatre Chants Russes" and the "Trois Histoires pour
    Enfants."





End of Project Gutenberg's Miniature essays: Igor Stravinsky, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINIATURE ESSAYS: IGOR STRAVINSKY ***

***** This file should be named 40597-8.txt or 40597-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/5/9/40597/

Produced by Linda Cantoni, Eleni Christofaki, Bryan Ness
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
